feat: tutorial to use the AI RAG Chat application (#1635)
mia-platform/documentation: docs/marketplace/tutorials/fully-functioning-rag-application.md

---
id: fully-functioning-rag-application
title: Create a fully functioning RAG application
sidebar_label: Create a fully functioning RAG application
---

> In this tutorial, we will learn how to create a fully functioning RAG application in a Mia-Platform project in just a few minutes. We will cover the setup of the necessary services and the generation of embeddings from any webpage. This will allow us to easily set up a chatbot that is ready to assist and provide help on the subject.

Author: Embeddings are explained the paragraph below. Probably I'd prefer to not mention them here since, yeah, could be confusing.

> In this tutorial, we will learn how to create a fully functioning RAG application in a Mia-Platform project in just a few minutes. We will cover the setup of the necessary services and the generation of embeddings from any webpage. This will allow us to easily set up a chatbot that is ready to assist and provide help on the subject.

Author: I removed references to the embeddings here  in order to explain them below.

> To accomplish this, we will utilize the Marketplace application called **AI RAG Chat**. This application includes the **AI RAG Template**, which leverages the APIs provided by [OpenAI](https://openai.com/) to receive answers to questions in natural language, and to create _embeddings_ from pieces of text extracted from a website. Additionally, we will use the **AI RAG Template Chat**, a small frontend application written in React that provides a quick chat system to communicate with the service.

Author: I removed references to the embeddings here  in order to explain them below.

> 

Reviewer: also mention the API gateway? or maybe move the details to the next sections, adding a link

> 

Author: Included few words about the api gateway. Thanks for the input.

This will allow us to compare the question asked by a user to the text saved in the database. In order to efficiently retrieve documents from the database, we need to find a reliable method to compare the meaning of the question with the meaning of the chunks we want to use. To achieve this, we can create embeddings of our chunks. The text is given to a mathematical model that will generate a multidimensional vector composed of millions of values between 0 and 1, effectively representing the meaning of the text.

By doing this, whenever our chatbot receives a question, we can:

- Generate embeddings of our question.
- Search the database for documents with embeddings that are similar in meaning to the embeddings of the question.
- Retrieve the matched documents and use their text to ensure that the chatbot provides an appropriate answer.

OpenAI has several [embedding models](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/embeddings/embedding-models), and MongoDB proposes the [Vector Search Index](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/atlas-vector-search/vector-search-overview/) to efficiently search in a database for documents where embeddings are similar in meaning to our question.

> The embeddings from the internal documentation can be created only once, or whenever there is an important update. There are several methods to execute this process. If the documentation is available on a website, the most common and straightforward approach is to perform [web scraping](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_scraping). This involves downloading all the pages of the website, removing any unnecessary information such as HTML tags, headers, footers, and styles, and generating embeddings from the remaining text.

Reviewer: _> The embeddings from the internal documentation can be created only once, or whenever there is an important update._

What do you mean by "they can be created only once?", and what do you refer to as "internal documentation"?

Author: _they can be created only once_, meaning could be a one-time process, you don't need to create them every time you use the chatbot or every time you run the service. You might re-create them once the documentation (the original knowledge base) changes. I should rephrase this.

_Internal documentation_ as stated in line 25, it's an example to simplify references to the texts that will be used for the RAG.

## 1. Install the required applications

We start a new project by creating two applications: the **API Documentation Aggregator** and the **AI RAG Chat**.

To begin, navigate to the design section and click on _Applications_ in the sidebar. Then, select _Create new Application_.

First, search for and select the **API Documentation Aggregator**. This will install the [_API Gateway_](/runtime_suite/api-gateway/10_overview.md) and the [_Swagger Aggregator_](/runtime_suite/swagger-aggregator/10_overview.md), along with several endpoints to expose the Swagger UI for viewing the APIs exposed by the configured services and retrieving the OpenAPI compliant schema.

:::note
The [API Documentation Aggregator](/runtime_suite_applications/api-documentation-aggregator/10_overview.md) is not required for the chatbot to function, but it is recommended for using the _AI RAG Template_ APIs to generate the embeddings. You can also refer to the instructions [in this tutorial](/console/tutorials/configure-marketplace-components/api-portal.mdx).
:::

> Next, proceed to set up the **AI RAG Chat**. It will prompt you to create the _API Gateway_ (using the existing one with the available listener), the _AI RAG Template_, and the _AI RAG Template Chat_, along with several endpoints to expose the service APIs for sending questions and generating embeddings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, proceed to set up the **AI RAG Chat**. It will prompt you to create the _API Gateway_ (you can use the previously created one with the available listener), the _AI RAG Template_, and the _AI RAG Template Chat_, along with several endpoints to expose the service APIs for sending questions and generating embeddings.
```

![AI RAG Chat in Marketplace](../img/ai-rag-chat-in-marketplace.png)

> Finally, we add the [API Portal](/runtime_suite/api-portal/10_overview.md). If it is not already included in the project, click on _Microservices_ menu in the sidebar, and then select _Create new microservice_. Choose _From Marketplace_, and on the following page, search for and create a new _API Portal_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, create the [API Portal](/runtime_suite/api-portal/10_overview.md). If it is not already included in the project, navigate to the _Microservices_ section, and then select _Create new microservice_. Choose _From Marketplace_, and on the following page, search for and create a new _API Portal_.
```

Once you have created these services, you can safely save the configuration.

## 2. Configure the AI Rag Template service

The next step is to configure the _AI RAG Template_ service. From the design section, navigate to the _Microservices_ page and select the service (the default name is _ai-rag-template_, but you may have changed its name). From there, click on the _Environment Variables_ tab where you need to modify the following values:

> - `MONGODB_CLUSTER_URI`: This is the full connection string to MongoDB.

Reviewer 2: Could we provide a mocked examples of a connection string to MongoDB and how to retrieve it?

Author: ```suggestion
- `MONGODB_CLUSTER_URI`: This is the full connection string to MongoDB (refer to the [official MongoDB documentation](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/guides/atlas/connection-string/#procedure) to find it).
```

- `EMBEDDING_API_KEY`: An API key to use when communicating with OpenAI for generating services. It should be the same as the OpenAI API key.
- `LLM_API_KEY`: An API key to use when communicating with OpenAI for generating services. It should also be the same as the OpenAI API key.

:::note

> `EMBEDDING_API_KEY` and `LLM_API_KEY` will have the same value: they are the API key that you can generate from [OpenAI](https://platform.openai.com).

Reviewer 2: can we further explain an example on how to generate such API keys?

Author: There are no real guides on how to create the API. Creating one from the dashboard at platform.openai.com should be pretty straightforward.

Author: ```suggestion
`EMBEDDING_API_KEY` and `LLM_API_KEY` will have the same value: they are the API key that you can generate from [related page on the OpenAI Developer Dashboard](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys).
```

:::

:::warning

> Since this is information that you don't want to have visible to anyone, it is preferable to include this information as [project variables](/console/project-configuration/manage-environment-variables/index.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure this information remains secure, it is recommended to include it as [project variables](/console/project-configuration/manage-environment-variables/index.md).
```

:::

> After updating the environment variables of the service, it is time to update the config map: click on the _ConfigMaps & Secrets_ tab and you will be redirected to the Config Map configuration page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After updating the environment variables of the _AI RAG Template_ service, it is time to update the config map: click on the _ConfigMaps & Secrets_ tab and you will be redirected to the Config Map configuration page.
```

The _AI RAG Template_ is created with a precompiled config map that includes all the required keys, but the values need to be included.

> To be more specific, the configuration should be as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of what the configuration should look like:
```

```json
{
  "llm": {
    "name": "gpt-4o-mini"
  },
  "embeddings": {
    "name": "text-embedding-3-small"
  },
  "vectorStore": {
    "dbName": "rag-database",
    "collectionName": "rag-collection",
    "indexName": "vector_index",
    "relevanceScoreFn": "cosine",
    "embeddingKey": "embedding",
    "textKey": "text",
    "maxDocumentsToRetrieve": 3
  }
}
```

> To be more specific:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More specifically, here is a detailed list of the meaning of each property:
```

- the `llm.name` key is the LLM model among those available from [OpenAI](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models), suggested are `gpt-4o` and `gpt-4o-mini`
- the `embeddings.name` key is the Embedding model used to generate embeddings, among those available from [OpenAI](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/embeddings), the suggested is `text-embedding-3-small`
- the `vectorStore.dbName` is the name of the database where the embeddings will be saved
- the `vectorStore.collectionName` is the name of the collection where the embeddings will be saved
- the `vectorStore.indexName` is the name of the [MongoDB Search Vector Index](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/atlas-vector-search/vector-search-overview/), with `vector_index` as suggested name; this is a particular index that the service will automatically create or update at the startup
- the `vectorStore.relevanceScoreFn` is the name of the _similarity search function_ used to retrieve the embedding documents; MongoDB includes three different available functions: `cosine` (suggested), `euclidean` and `dotProduct`

> - the `vectorStore.embeddingKey` is the name of the field where to save the embedding of a single document, in the shape of a multidimensional array; we suggest using the default value `embedding`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the `vectorStore.embeddingKey` is the name of the field where the embedding of a single document is saved, in the shape of a multidimensional array; we suggest using the default value `embedding`
```

Author: Um, actually `embedding` should be plural..

```suggestion
- the `vectorStore.embeddingKey` is the name of the field where the embeddings of a single document are saved, in the shape of a multidimensional array; we suggest using the default value `embedding`
```

![Assistant Playground homepage](../img/assistant-playground-home.png)

The frontend will display a page with an input field where we can communicate with the chatbot. However, at this point, we don't have any embeddings, so specific questions may not give us the expected response.

To see the list of all the APIs exposed by the configured services, we can go to the swagger UI of the _API Portal_. It can be accessed at the endpoint `/documentations/api-portal`. In the list of APIs, we can find two APIs with the tag _Embeddings_: `POST api/embeddings/generate` and `GET api/embeddings/status`.

The `POST api/embeddings/generate` API allows us to generate embeddings starting from a webpage. The service will download the page, extract all the text, and generate embeddings from it. It will also search for links on the page and recursively generate embeddings from the linked pages that have the same domain and follow the specified filter path.

> Generating embeddings is an asynchronous task, meaning that the response is returned immediately, but the generation process continues in the background. To check the status of the generation process, we can use the `GET api/embeddings/status` API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generating embeddings is an asynchronous task that can take a while to complete, meaning that the API response is returned immediately, but the generation process continues in the background. To check the status of the generation process, we can use the `GET api/embeddings/status` API:
```

- If the response is `{"status": "running"}`, it means the process is still ongoing.
- If the response is `{"status": "idle"}`, it means there are no active processes at the moment (indicating that the previous process has finished).

With this information, we can start generating our embeddings. We can make a request to the `api/embeddings/generate` API by expanding the corresponding card and clicking on "Try it out".

![Embeddings generate API](../img/embeddings-generate-api.png)

In the request body, we need to provide the following information:

- `url` (mandatory): The starting page from which we want to generate embeddings.
- `filterPath` (optional): A more specific path that will be used as a filter when finding new pages to download and analyze.

Let's try with part of the Mia-Platform documentation:

```json
{
    "url": "https://docs.mia-platform.eu/docs/fast_data/what_is_fast_data",

>     "filterPath": "https://docs.mia-platform.eu/docs/fast-data"

Reviewer 2: this link is broken. could we use another example from our docs?

Author: That's the best we can do.

```suggestion
    "filterPath": "https://docs.mia-platform.eu/docs/fast_data"
```

}
```

> We click on the `Execute` button and receive an immediate response indicating that the embedding generation has started. At this point, we simply need to wait for the process to complete by sending requests to the `/api/embeddings/status` API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We click on the `Execute` button and receive an immediate response indicating that the embedding generation has started. At this point, we simply need to wait for the process to complete, leveraging the `/api/embeddings/status` API to check for status updates.
```

:::info

> The process may take a few seconds to several minutes, depending on the number of webpages that need to be downloaded and scraped.

Reviewer 3: We could mention that the generation process cannot be blocked and that it is possible to run only a generation task at time

Author: That's very important, thanks for the feeback.

I've updated this section of the tutorial.

> It is a good idea to check the service logs to ensure that everything is progressing smoothly.

Author: Done!

:::

## 4. Enjoy

> Once the process is over, there's no need to re-deploy or restart any service: after a few moments, the MongoDB Vector Index will be updated and the frontend application is ready to give us meaningful answers based on the embeddings generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the process is over, there's no need to re-deploy or restart any service: after a few moments, the MongoDB Vector Index will be updated and the frontend application will be ready to give us meaningful answers based on the generated embeddings.
```

![Assistant Playground working](../img/assistant-playground-working.png)

## Troubleshooting

### I have generated the embeddings, but the chatbot still does not answer correctly to my questions.

Check the logs of the _AI RAG Template_. At the very beginning, it should say whether the MongoDB Vector Search Index has been created/updated or if it failed for any reason (e.g. database temporarily not accessible or the collection does not exists yet). In any case the service will start.

> You may need to restart the pod of the service manually create/update the index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may need to restart the service pod and manually create or update the index.
```

Author: ```suggestion
You may need to restart the service pod or manually create (or update) the index.
```

---
id: fully-functioning-rag-application

> title: Create a fully functioning RAG application

Reviewer 4: Maybe I would use a shorter title like "Create a RAG application". 

Another thing, let's make the file name, page title, and ID the same. For example:
file: create-a-rag-application.md
title: Create a RAG Application
id: create-a-rag-application

- the `vectorStore.dbName` is the name of the database where the embeddings will be saved
- the `vectorStore.collectionName` is the name of the collection where the embeddings will be saved
- the `vectorStore.indexName` is the name of the [MongoDB Search Vector Index](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/atlas-vector-search/vector-search-overview/), with `vector_index` as suggested name; this is a particular index that the service will automatically create or update at the startup
- the `vectorStore.relevanceScoreFn` is the name of the _similarity search function_ used to retrieve the embedding documents; MongoDB includes three different available functions: `cosine` (suggested), `euclidean` and `dotProduct`
- the `vectorStore.embeddingKey` is the name of the field where the embeddings of a single document are saved, in the shape of a multidimensional array; we suggest using the default value `embedding`
- the `vectorStore.textKey` is the name of the field that contains the original text used to be transformed into embeddings, and that will be used to help the chatbot return the answer; we suggest using the default value `text`

> - the `vectorStore.maxDocumentsToRetrieve` is the maximum number of documents that will be extracted and used to help the chatbot return the answer; the default value is `3`, but it is usually suggested to use a value between `2` and `5`, depending on how big the collection of the embeddings is

Author: Specifichiamo che: se abbiamo pochi embedding è meglio usare 2, se abbiamo tanti embedding meglio usare 5
